why does anyone write a book why does  anyone  publish a book why does anyone  design  program and publish  a new video  you know there's a kind of judgment on  your character tell me something about  who you are in terms of the answer  you give  some of you may think you're very  cynical and very cosmopolitan very  worldly you say money you know let's  just let's just say let's just say the  motivation is is money i've i've been in  the theater  nobody nobody is performing shakespeare  for money okay nobody  i know this is going to sound ridiculous  to you okay  it's not worth it  it's so horrible the process of  memorizing this script  showing up every day  rehearsing it being on stage and the  worst thing of all about live theater is  that you can't kid yourself  about who's in the audience  so you go through all this crap just to  perform shakespeare for these these  schlemiel's these imcels in the audience  who really have no understanding and no  refinement at all you get you could see  who these these people are  no  you know there's something else there's  something that motivates you  to perform  shakespeare all right and it's for  everyone involved in the process there  are people who invest in the theater  there are investors who have to be drawn  together in a conference room you sit  them down around a desk and say hey look  guys  i know there aren't that many uh  intellectuals here in niagara on the  lake  you're in some third grade oh you know  what's great great example the  retirement towns in florida  all those town the beach towns in  florida every single one of them has a  theater and they do opera and they do  shakespeare and those guys okay okay  guys  julius caesar  by william shakespeare even the people  who are putting the money in you know  you're a guy you have to do that with  you still with a few million dollars  you could be putting your few million  dollars into the stock market you could  be putting your few million dollars into  gold frankly you could you could do  anything with your few million dollars  and let's say for a two-year period  of this investment there is absolutely  no chance that you are bankrolling the  performance of william shakespeare that  you are funding this with the  expectation of making or that you are  primarily  doing it  to make money you'd be the extent to  which everyone involved in the process  i'm not saying money isn't a factor  right it's that it's not the primary  motivator who the hell goes into the  book publishing industry today like  whether it's the writer the investor the  publisher the distributor who's in this  business  to make money now in 2022. i think it  would be more fair to say for all these  industries and part of my thesis in this  video is that now the video game  industry is becoming more and more like  book publishing and book publishing is  changing too book publishing is going  more and more like the video game  industry that's what i'm going to try to  convince you of here you know  i think it's fair to say they're more  they're mostly people  who had the unquestioned assumption  that they'd make money  right that there would be something they  wouldn't lose money well we're not going  to go broke performing william  shakespeare when you invest in a gold  mine  you can lose money  you could make money you could become  very wealthy you could lose all your  money like all the investment go and you  it's a total failure it's total disaster  that happens with gold mining okay well  it's the there's a risk and reward in  business  you think of publishing books you think  of performing shakespeare right and  until recently you could also think of  of uh video games this way these are the  creative arts  where there's not a lot of money to be  made but the assumption was there's also  not a lot of money to be lost so what  motivates people  to write a book  what is not the same thing that  motivates them to go into goals finding  you want to grab the book on gold mining  babe you still got it on the shelf yeah  in terms of what i have on my life some  of you some of you will see this cover  and you'll know right away the  historical episode i'm alluding to and  some of you have no idea there's a real  footnote in history for you there anyway  briex all right thanks babe  just a coincidence we have to have that  yeah i bought that as a gift for melissa  so we'll see we'll see when you have  time to read it  we both have both have a pretty long  pretty long reading list  um  why do people write books at all  and why do people come together to mount  shakespeare and i would say increasingly  why do people put their money together  to make video games like we talk about  indie dev independently developed video  games and stuff you know i think  if we can be honest with ourselves there  really is a fundamental impetus here to  change the world  well  some of you will be saying  this is isil mazar speaking and he has  the delusion that everyone else has the  same kind of noble and lofty ambitions  that he does no i don't  no i don't you know i think that you  know when someone tries to become the  next woody allen there's a comparison  okay so you have a guy who's not  terribly handsome  who wants to do a bunch of comedies  about a self-pitying middle-aged white  man and his sex life and his sense of  self-confidence and his ego and his  psychology  the person who wants to be  the next woody allen in their own  strange subtle way they're trying to  change the world  right they think hey there are millions  of other self-pitying middle-aged white  men who are unhappy with their sex lives  or just just divorced their third wife  and are looking at their fourth wife  whatever they're men who are going  through the same things this book is  going to be about and this book is going  to mean so much to them and if you adapt  that book and turn it into a broadway  play  same hypothesis right if you make it  into a movie the book is a hit and now  you're going to make a hollywood movie  of it this is this is the definitive  statement for self-pitying middle-aged  white men in our time  and this stuff of course it's um it's so  much more blatant  when the people we're talking about are  neither white nor male nor middle-aged  right see this all the time now  mainstream media whether it's book  publishing  movies or whatever like okay  this  is a story  about a pakistani immigrant family  and a teenage girl in that pakistani  immigrant family who's coming of age you  know  uh of her quest for acceptance and her  feeling of rebellion against your family  this is going to be again probably  starts as a novel this is going to be  the story for pakistani immigrant  teenagers in america  you know why are they doing this do they  think they're going to get rich they're  going to make a million dollars out of  you know a story about a self-pitying  teenage pakistani immigrant no  they really think they're going to  change the world they're going to  provide this  this kind of locus uh even if it's just  for  say something completely  emotive and emotional and  [Music]  self-indulgent like it's you know  they're not fighting a revolution  they're not creating a new government  there is this fundamental impetus to  change the world and to leave your mark  on it right that you  are going to be the next  woody allen right but exactly what i  want to talk about in this video  is the extent to which there never can  be another woody allen the extent to  which the publishing industry as we  understand it is ending  and i think in close parallel the video  game industry is ending  now  what's happening in video games  it's easier to visualize  than what's happening in books there's  one reason i want to bring it in here as  a  a contrast or a parallelism or or what  have you  playstation 5  nintendo switch  have you have you seen the price  just to buy a new video game for the  nintendo switch here in canada they're  not all exactly the same it would be  reasonable to say that one video game  for the nintendo switch will cost you  about eighty dollars  eight zero that's just software it's not  getting into the cost of hardware  so on and so forth now  if you think of a pie chart there are  certain number of people in the world  spending money on video games at any  time  and what i'm about to describe is a  pattern that actually already existed in  the 1980s  um  but it's it's become much much more  important since the year 2000 it's  become it's a much more important skew  more powerful effect in distorting the  market so this might sound crazy to you  but back in the 1980s this was first  discovered by atari  the atari company found  that even when the whole world had moved  on to the sega genesis to the 16-bit  consoles atari could still make money  selling and reselling their incredibly  primitive games from the 8-bit era  at a lower price  and basically at a higher quality of  video fidelity  so there already were people there were  some people when you think about the pie  chart right we think about the pie chart  for uh 1992 there were a whole lot of  people and all their enthusiasm and all  their money was going into the sega  genesis the new  16-bit consoles but there were some  people on that pie chart that were them  added up to millions of dollars that's  why atari was launching these new  consoles there were some people in that  chart who said no they would rather buy  or or rebuy purchase again  the old games from the earlier  generation  right that were now available for like  five bucks  that they were they were so much cheaper  than the leading edge game so that  pattern already existed now this big  difference atari 2600 you can't even see  a human face there are no facial  expressions in these games these really  really low quality  video output games uh how about music  have you ever heard of greatest hits  list the best music from the atari 2600  even the atari 1700 there's there's  either no music where the music is  indescribably horrible you know whereas  sega genesis has great music you know  there's this there's this really steep  difference but  already at that point  there were people  interested in buying the older games for  new consoles to play with new a new  screen new hardware better quality in  this in this sense but obviously it's  the same software  it's the same game already in the 1990s  right  the history of video games was snuffing  out to some extent the creative  potential of the future but the  proportion between these two parts of  the  pie chart right that would continue  to change and change and change  as the decades went by until now we're  at this point when in the year 2022  you could say to someone seriously why  would anyone buy a playstation 5  when you can just go on playing games  from the playstation 2  at a lower and lower price  and at a higher and higher quality of  video output of graphical fidelity  however you want to think of it however  you want to play it why why would anyone  do that  and no i'm not saying there's no  difference in the graphics between  playstation 2 and playstation 5. there  is there's a difference  but if you take a playstation 2 game and  then you play it on today's hardware  right this is also true with the arcade  games from that era if you take  virtua fighter 2 the arcade version not  the home console version and then you  play it on an emulator on today's  hardware right i know you have to  compare that to playstation 5. again i'm  not saying there's no difference  but this is nothing like the difference  between the atari 2600 and the sega  genesis right  more and more people and cost is a  factor here economics is a factor and  fame  is a factor right the fact that the  games made in the air that era any era i  mean the fact that pacman is still  famous today it has this brand name  recognition everyone knows pac-man  people are willing to spend money to buy  pac-man because they know what they're  going to get right how it is a totally  new game  made by a no-name developer  a nothing  studio by someone you've never heard of  before a game you've never heard of made  by a person you've never heard of how  does that compete with pac-man how does  that compete with tetris  now again i think this discourse is out  in the open  in the world of video games  i think uh i think we've avoided  thinking about it in both publishing  we've avoided thinking about it in the  other creative arts whether you think  that is books  theater life the mind intellect  whatever you want to say  i think we've avoided thinking about it  because it's it's profoundly disturbing  in its implications what we would like  to believe  is that the playstation 2 was creating a  positive opportunity for there to be  something new and better and positive  and innovative afterwards  like it's thanks to the playstation 2  that we have the playstation 3 and the  playstation 4 and the playstation 5. we  have this idiom in english that one is  paving the way  for the other  and it's very disturbing to think  instead  that the success of the playstation 2  was actually eroding the basis for  any possible  innovation  in video games as an art form or video  games as a literature to come thereafter  that actually it's not that playstation  2 was paving the way for the success of  the playstation 5. playstation 2 was  creating a situation where how do you  justify spending 80 dollars for a new  video game on a very expensive console  when you could play playstation 2 games  for the rest of your life  and never exhaust  that library  you see what i'm hinting at here with  books see  now  again there's there's a footnote here  that's of some significance some people  some people are interested in things  that are new  just because they're new some  some  it's easy to overstate that in your mind  and a huge proportion of what people  call  new software  is in fact retro  nintendo makes new mario games are they  really new  namco makes new pac-man games are they  really new even sony and microsoft and  so on the extent to which they are  recycling they're creating derivative  works that's the legal term they're  creating sequels and reinventing the  extent of which they're leaning on  that memory of the past right i think  that indicates further the peril that  we're talking about here you can you can  go and print a new edition of william  shakespeare's plays you can print a new  a new book of this it's it's partly new  right but in a sense no we don't say  this but books it's retro right it's  it's a recycling of something past now  one reason i want to talk about this  video  is that i have never heard anyone  discuss it under any headache not in  terms of non-fiction  fiction not in terms of say  popular mass market writing like science  fiction novels nor in terms of  academic literature history  serious and important non-fiction i've  never heard any discussion of this  whatsoever i've never seen in any  article  i'm not just saying youtube videos or  podcasts or something this is a huge  major question for us to ask ourselves  individual creative artists and looking  at the future of the industry and how  we're going to how any of us are going  to write anything how any of us are  going to reach an audience in the world  as as technology and economics change  and that humor that human aspiration to  change the world very much you know  remains the same  but there's one concept i want to bring  in at this point that's  talked about maybe a little too often  it's really familiar within the  discipline of economics  and this is the idea that the present  value of a product the present value of  an investment the present value of an  item or thing  is partly derived from its perceived  value  in the future  all right so what is the value of a car  you're going to buy a brand new car  part of its value part  is your assumption that in future you'll  be able to sell it secondhand and recoup  some of the value now  there may be a small part with buying a  car you may buy a car and then okay  you're gonna buy this car for you're  gonna drive it around for five years  you're gonna get five years worth of  value out of it and then there's some  money you're going to get back when you  sell but still even though that's you  know a small piece of the pie with your  decision-making process to buy this car  rather than that car if someone says to  you you're looking at two cars that are  that are comparable  i say no no don't buy that car buy this  one because it has a higher resale value  when you sell it second hand you'll get  more money back  hmm okay so now you've got a decision  which car is worth more like the price  may be the same but you know the resale  value for one car has been a huge factor  in the housing market people buy a house  yeah they buy it to live in it but they  don't buy it as a disposable good  a huge in that case it could be 100 of  your decision the single most important  factor may be the projected value of  that house in future but this comes down  to and involves purchases like jewelry  people do not buy gold necklaces as an  investment they do not buy gold as an  investment in the sense of investing in  gold in the stock market but  nevertheless the reason why gold has  this tremendous cultural value  in every society on earth there are no  exceptions in india in china in europe  right this transcends culture it's not  that it's not that everyone finds gold  so much more beautiful than copper  burnished copper can be every bit as  beautiful as gold but copper can never  have the resale value is that when you  were buying necklaces earrings  sorry i don't i don't know much about  jewelry  bracelets  right that  some part of the money you are investing  so to speak in buying that gold can be  recovered in future even if you melt the  gold down and just sell it as a  commodity okay  now  the implications of this for video games  are more obvious and more easy to see  than they are for books  if  if we lived in a world where pac-man  was created as a plastic cartridge just  once  and then you could never buy it again  think about how valuable those  cartridges would be like what if pac-man  was only manufactured  in the 8-bit era for 8-bit systems  and then never again there was no other  way  you could get pac-man we can step this  up a level  because as you probably know the home  versions the console versions are much  more simplistic and much more  dissatisfactory compared to uh the  arcade version  what would the value be  of a pacman arcade system  a pacman pcb  or a whole arcade cabinet  how much would people be paying for  those if that was today  the  only way  you could ever play arcade quality  pac-man  these things would be worth enormous  amounts of money by the way when they  were first made they cost enormous  amounts of money so you can look up how  much did a pizza restaurant have to pay  to buy an original pacman arcade cabinet  they were incredibly expensive and  businesses made that purchase with a  financial forecast of how much they'd  earn back in quarters  over 10 years of having that stand there  and people coming in and playing the  game again again playing paying 25 cents  again again let me tell you something 25  cents was worth a lot more money back  then you have to calculate inflation  here people paid a huge amount for the  machine and the machines generated a  huge amount of revenue that was the  original situation right  but the resale value right  with old  video game hard with old  hardware and software and so on right is  this something like gold  or is this something where now people  would say what are you crazy why would  you pay thousands of dollars for pacman  you can get it in so many formats in so  many different ways  for free  or basically for the cost of shipping  and handling when this has dropped down  to a value of like it's maybe five  dollars and most of that's going into  the cost of putting it into a box and  sending to you in the mail depending on  but if you get it as a download it may  be nothing or maybe a dollar 25 like  this is this has come as close to being  free  as possible people don't want to think  through the implications of this for  book writing for authorship and for book  publishing the implications are  disturbing it's upsetting  to really think it through  so the book publishing industry did not  change that much in the whole of the  20th century um i can't because of the  rise of the internet i cannot describe  the 20th century for our purposes here  as  1901-2001  but i can say  between 1880 and 1980 have a nice clean  century frankly we could say 1890 to  1990 also now the whole world changed so  much between 1880 and 1980 but the book  publishing industry didn't  um  science fiction houses  used to publish series of books  with numbers on the spine  so  the vast majority of people buying the  vast majority of these books they didn't  know the author like the author wasn't  famous yet right they didn't recognize  the title  the title wasn't famous yet maybe it  never would be famous oh here's here's a  book by some guy  if you guys know these books are still  collectible because the quality of the  paintings on the cover they'd pay an  artist to give you this evocative  beautiful image normally we have a woman  in a bikini  and there's a space alien and there's a  rocket ship and maybe there's a hero  holding a ray gun shooting you didn't  know who is the author what in the the  title isn't famous the name of the  author isn't famous right but it was a  known  science fiction publisher it was part of  a series this is number 24 number 98 you  could put on your bookshelf in a series  you know you know in a sense the  editorial team behind it but here's the  other thing you know that now has  disappeared forever if you buy the first  edition of a book in that whole period  of history  19 try to me from 1880 to 1980 during  that century you know  the first edition of a book will not  lose its value  it's not an investment like the stock  market you're not going to plan for your  retirement by amassing a huge library of  science fiction books but if you bought  the first edition of any one of those  books for five dollars  you could be completely confident that  fifty years later it would be worth more  than five dollars maybe not much more  maybe it's worth ten dollars or 20 right  but that it would not become worthless  that its value would not tarnish it  would not rust it would not wither away  if you just kept this book in decent  condition on a shelf  it was going to be worth money 50 years  from now break it down real quick any  book talk about pulp fiction here  mainstream books and books nobody's ever  heard of the vast majority of science  fiction authors they never the book was  never made into a movie there are two  possibilities with every book in that  science fiction uh series and some of  you may know people who do this kind of  collecting collecting of books or yeah  we got some yeah yeah shout out to  generation x gamer yeah i i'll come back  to that how much  how much money are you willing to put  into pac-man in 2022 and what is it  worth given this economic factor i'm  discussing here right  um  okay so again i'm not saying to you here  that book collecting was ever a way to  to  set up your retirement fund nobody ever  said they don't need to save for  retirement and don't need to save up to  put their kids through college because  they own science fiction books but it  profoundly influences consumer behavior  to know if you buy this book today for  five dollars  it's going to be worth at least five  dollars 10 years from now 20 years now  profoundly influences consumer favor it  profoundly influences the publisher's  behavior and it profoundly influences  the artist's behavior the author's  behavior the creative people's behavior  who make these things right and the  world changes  when the assumption is any book today  that comes out for forty dollars it's  not the usual price book a book comes  out at forty  if your assumption is just a few months  from now you can get it for five dollars  and just a few months after that or  years from now you will be able to get  it entirely for free as a download from  an internet or just for the cost of  shipping and handling whatever that  might be like maybe it's gonna cost you  two dollars three dollars but at as  close to zero  as possible that that is what its value  is going to sink to  in the future  okay that is going to influence  profoundly the number of people who pay  40  in the first month the book comes out  that's going to influence the number of  books the publisher puts out and that's  going to influence the number of people  writing books thinking they can make a  living that way video games are easier  to visualize right like i think in  videos people are in denial about this  like look guys right now on steam i can  use an example the steam shop  the nintendo switch shop  any of these shops any of these shops in  the world right okay look at how many  indie developed games are 80 percent off  on steam today  there's a number one another website  humble bundle it's another one of these  things you know look at how many games  and they could be games from two years  ago  it doesn't have to be 20 years ago they  could be from the playstation 2 but they  could be from six months ago like quite  soon they have this it's like a  hardcover versus softcover thing and  publish it there's this brief period  where they try to tell you this game is  worth 80 or 40 dollars like a big price  and then they drop to being as close to  zero as they possibly can be and again  sometimes it's like the cost of paper is  involved the cost of the box the cost of  shipping you in the mail if you buy  second-hand video games say that that's  like we've bought a whole bunch of games  i bought uh pac-man  for under five dollars but it still cost  me a few dollars because it was sent to  me in the mail like i bought some copies  of pac-man it's it's it's not even the  cost of manufacturing anymore it's just  the cost of someone sending to you from  a warehouse there's some cost if you  know in advance  that every single video game that comes  up is is not going to have a regression  to the mean this way  its value is going to disintegrate it's  going to tarnish the price is going to  come down not by 50  by 80 by 90  its value is going to disappear and not  20 years from now  like next month  okay how does the industry work  now i haven't answered that question i  don't think the industry's gonna end i  don't think it's gonna disappear i think  the horror that people have to deal with  in the video game industry is the extent  to which this is becoming  more like a non-profit area of the arts  of the creative arts that this is  becoming more like what the opera is  today what theaters today where people  get involved people put on these plays  with no real expectation of making money  or where it's it's not about the money  for everyone involved um  okay so again to be clear  i'm not saying in the past  people bought books in order to get rich  people we're not buying books  i'm not even saying people wrote books  or published books in order to get rich  although some did there were 100 years  ago there was a lot of money to be in  the publishing today there's none it's  it's a change right but i'm saying  there's a really fundamental economic  assumption here that has changed and  it's changed forever okay  um  and it's not as simple as saying that  it's produced by  scarcity like it's not just because of  scarcity this is quite complex  culturally and in terms of use use is an  economic concept here like how are you  actually going to be able to read the  book how are you actually going to play  the video game so and so it's it's more  complex than that  do you want to jump in  um  guys if you have anything intelligent to  say in the comments i will uh i will  read and pay attention to your comments  and questions  if you don't have anything intelligent  to say don't feel pressured by me to say  this video is going to end up on my new  channel that's mentioned in the  description uh from ink to inc where i  want to talk more about about book  publishing and to some extent about  movies and tdf tv adaptations now now  you can say tv streaming annotations but  adaptations of books into uh  performance art should always say for a  better term i want to talk about these  things and as you can guess from this  video i'm interested in the way in which  cultural production is linked to  economics cultural production is linked  to politics often in ways that people  don't really want to  want to let themselves  think about  okay um  just finish with this image of a  bookshelf with a series of science  fiction books and this would be true of  many other genres of fiction too or they  just have numbered entries in a series  we don't know a great non-fiction we  know grizzlies you know the the every  man uh series do you still have that the  small version of aristotle the small  green  aristo so this is another and these are  worth money today still you know good  good luck doing this again so they're  cute collectible this is a numbered  series from every man editions every man  auditions the lobe editions that's  non-fiction that's aristotle right and  people want to own the whole set so i'm  just going to show the front of space  here  we don't get a nice furnace piece here  okay oh there you go  a treaties on government or the politics  of aristotle so people want to have a  whole bookshelf with a with a matching  set of these  they're collectible and again they were  a store for a hundred years this was a  reliable store of value right and sorry  so scarcity isn't the only factor but  scarcity is one of them iterate as  follows  if someone publishes a new  science fiction book by a completely  unknown author so the author isn't  famous and the title isn't famous it's  just new maybe it's great maybe it's  terrible most likely it's mediocre this  is a new book it has in that sense it  has no no reputational value or  something right uh unlike  nintendo publishing a new game by a new  game with mario in the title you know  what i mean there's there's a reputation  there they're drawing on in the past  there right it's a new mario game but  there's a sense in which it's not new at  all right or indeed if we if we publish  aristotle again today we're leaning on  aristotle's reputation a reputation  built up over hundreds of years with all  kinds of publishers and translators  working hard and university professors  creating and sustaining that that  reputation but if you bought a book  anytime during this strange century 1880  1980  totally unknown science fiction author  totally unknown title  right  you could be certain it would retain its  value or that it would increase in value  because there are really only two  possibilities  one  the book is a flop  and therefore the first edition is the  only edition so therefore you have  scarcity right that's simple  economically conception so if anyone  wants to read this book nobody has  foreseen that the internet is going to  happen it's so the book is a flop  therefore it's rare like at the time of  its publications it never gets reprinted  it never gets republished the author  dies in obscurity right no this is this  happened to millions of people okay the  book it's it could be extremely valuable  all the time it could double whatever it  could it could it could 10x could  increase then you bought it for five  dollars now it's worth 50 and you're  you're not gonna you're not gonna put  your kids to college this way but this  becomes a valuable book because the  first edition is the only edition and  the assumption before the internet is  that is the only way to read the book is  to get a copy of the book so there's  this aftermarket that goes on forever  and ever right  uh now again i said to you  hypothetically what if this happened  with pac-man  what if the only way to play arcade  pac-man was to get an arcade pcb to get  an original pac-man cabinet  again you could take the circuit out and  put it in a new use a new screen you  could use a new joystick but where the  actual circuitry had to stay being  unspeakably valuable these would be  incredibly rare and not just again it's  not just rarity it's not just scarcity  right there will be people who want to  have that experience  what is again today  if you have someone you talk about  spending thousands of dollars in an  arcade packing game and say what are you  crazy you can play it on your mobile  phone you can play it on a wrist watch  you can play it on a laptop computer you  can play it on your toaster like any  hardware if your toaster has an lcd  screen  i can play it on your fridge you know  you know go through you know what do you  mean like pac-man  even if it's not legal because you know  the company who owns the rights they may  be trying to create artificial scarcity  right  why can't you play pac-man on your  playstation 2.  you can make it a list of possible you  know every every form of hardware  imagine okay nobody wanted to think  about what this would do in in the world  of of books right i read it's i mean it  should be a priceless book  i read the  autobiography of napoleon's younger  brother that's a rare book  and um  i have a friend so all of our ods  he says he managed to find volume two  and i forgot i think he found it in  french not in english volume 2 i think  it doesn't exist  in english you know how i read that book  i downloaded it for free as a pdf this  is a rare historically important book i  didn't pay one dollar you can calculate  the cost of my computer or my internet  subscription it's not truly zero cost  but you're coming down to  almost zero cost we didn't want to think  about the corrosive effect  on creativity on innovation i mean i'm  interested in the writer not just  interested in the death of the book  publishing industry i'm just how we can  live how we survive as writers once the  industry has died the industry isn't  paying advances anymore okay that's over  you know in the industry nobody expects  to be able to make money out of  publishing anything and it's partly for  this reason like the video game industry  right well yeah you can sell this video  game today for fifty dollars  but everyone buying it knows it will be  available for five dollars soon enough  and when you talk about download based  services  like steam  like a nintendo eshop these things where  you don't own any anything physically  real for this game right uh you're  getting you're not even getting a  similar product for five dollars you're  getting exactly the same product exactly  the same  experience like there's no it's not even  the difference between a paper book and  reading a book on your mobile phone or  as a pdf on kindle as an entrepreneur  where there's no difference at all it's  the same website expecting some people  to pay fifty dollars for the exact same  product that some people will pay five  dollars for right  think about how that changes your  perception as a consumer and your  behavior as a consumer if you have a kid  let's say you have an 11 year old kid  who's saying mommy mommy i want to buy  this video game  mommy has to explain to the kid  look they're asking for fifty dollars  this video game but i know i can get it  for you for five dollars just a few  months from now  maximum two years from now she can say  to the kid if she's being honest maybe  six months from now because you're a  little kid six months seems like a long  time what do you mean  that's the tension you've got there  with with books right in a sense it's  it's even more extreme because we're now  in a situation where anyone in the right  mind will say look conventional book  publishing is obsolete just jump  straight to the 80 off like why don't  you just just put it for the first place  it was one dollar per download why even  do any of this crap why even doing this  riga mole rigmarole in the middle why  put out a hard cover why put it a soft  cover jump to kindle distribution jump  to electronic only for that that minimum  that minimum price right so all right um  i digressed slightly from saying when  you're talking about the stack of  science fiction books any period 1930s  1960s  people still do cody's day there are two  possibilities one the book is a flop the  first edition is the only edition and  then it's very simple to understand why  that's worth money or why it was right  up to the invention of the internet  right now the internet exists  who cares what's this book worth you can  get it anywhere you can get it for the  price of a download and this is also an  interesting factor the internet also  changed the world just by making it  possible  however scarce it is right  the type of scarcity was different  before the internet because if you're  looking for this book if you want to buy  it you go into a bookstore that's  charging a hundred dollars before the  internet  you have to pay hundred dollars when are  you ever going to see this book again  there's a rare book you're going you're  walking from bookstore to bookstore and  checking if they have the book you  happen to go into a bookstore that has  the book it's a hundred dollars  you can't you can you can ask the person  look can you hold this for me you can  then walk and check four other  bookstores see what they're charging and  see if they have a copy at all nobody  else has it you have to pay a hundred  dollars when the whole world is  connected by the internet somebody  somewhere has a copy of that book  they'll sell you for fifty dollars  most likely someone somewhere has a copy  they'll sell you for five dollars  right so just the reality of amazon.com  the reality of ebay  even if we couldn't instantly and at  zero cost we produce an infinite number  of copies of books and share them right  that profoundly impacts as i say book  production as well as book consumption  and of course this impacts video games  right like i mean again we talk about  pac-man as a plastic cartridge right if  i'm not buying it as a download buying  as a physically real item somebody  somewhere wants to sell this for five  dollars like you know and you can  consume an argument that it's really  worth much more well guess what the  internet connected us all in this way i  can go on facebook marketplace i can go  on amazon i can go on uh what does  doesn't matter but some secondhand  reselling website and guess what  somebody's willing to sell five dollars  someone's basically saying i want to get  rid of this crap  same with books  some you know somebody's uncle dies they  inherit their their their uncle's book  collection the science fiction books  don't matter to them well uncle's dead  now let's put these up on the internet  for basically the cost of shipping and  handling let's get rid of this just  instead of putting it in a landfill  that's what video games are to enough  people you know maybe it's worth more to  you sentimental or whatever you're a  collector you want to own every version  of pac-man or something you have a  collection like this but it's worth more  than five dollars to you not the person  selling it right and then what is the  effect on a creative innovative young  person today who wants to make the next  pacman who wants to make a new pacman  and he isn't a famous person he doesn't  have a famous name right he's not  shigeru miyamoto or whatever he's not  doesn't have a famous name and he can't  use the name pac-man like this game also  can't have a famous name he can't call  his game super mario we can't call it  pacman there's no built-in audience  there's no reputational value  guys  creative writers that's the position  we're all in  you want to write your story about your  life or your science fiction tale  whatever it is you thought you want to  write your memoir you want to write  fiction you want to even write history  you think you have something really  valuable to say about napoleon bonaparte  about the history of napoleon bonaparte  and that you have an angle and you have  an opinion that nobody's ever published  before and it really matters how many  people are going to buy the book because  you are competing with  every book that ever has been published  about napoleon bonaparte before you and  they are all  cheaper than your book you're selling  your book for fifty dollars those other  books are available for five dollars or  if people are willing to put up with  digital download only available for free  video games exactly the same problem  exactly the same pattern say hey i have  this brilliant wonderful new idea for  a mario style game a platform a sonic  the hedgehog style game that style of  game and you're so confident yourself  you have something really valuable  really original okay well guess what you  have to compete with the accumulated  history of every single mario style game  every single sonic the hedgehog style  game and all of those games  are available for five dollars or  zero or like as close to zero as the  market will bear as the distribution  system you know can render you so is  your game that much better that you as a  nobody producing a no-name game you're  gonna have a hit and what are you gonna  sell it for can you even sell it for  five dollars because you can't compete  you're gonna sell it for fifty dollars  and what industry is gonna support you  who's gonna invest the money in advance  who's going to pay you in advance who's  going to provide the really expensive uh  infrastructure for development and  production so that your game exists at  all right the same way let me tell you  this an actual printing press is quite  expensive the infrastructure to produce  and distribute a book it's not cheap and  it's not free who's going to do that  when they as the producer and all of the  consumers have the knowledge in advance  six months from now this is gonna be  worth five bucks  two years from now it's going to be  worth zero  okay  you do not see a lot of people wearing  copper jewelry because everyone knows  copper rusts copper tarnishes copper  disintegrates you can polish it  copper can have this wonderful beautiful  mirror-like finish copper can be every  bit as beautiful as gold okay and  there's a sense in which copper can be  just as valuable as gold but it's not a  store of value you can't buy and wear  copper jewelry copper copper rings  copper bangles right with the  expectation that your grandchildren will  inherit them you can't buy them with the  expectation you can melt it down and  sell it for its value and frankly how  many years is copper going to last it  depends if you have a copper wedding  ring and you wash your hands and you  wear it in the shower how long pardon me  how long does a copper wedding ring last  compared to a gold  wedding ring  right to to a subtle extent that i think  really matters intellectually culturally  politically economically right the whole  book publishing industry went from being  gold to copper  and nobody paid attention nobody cared  nobody thought about the implications i  think the whole video game industry at  least they're talking about it at least  they're aware it's a problem they're  going from being being gold  okay so  i still haven't finished my allegory  believe it or not of the science fiction  books on the shelf so there were two  possibilities one possibility is it's a  first edition  and the first edition is the only  edition it never comes out again again i  had to use something hypothetical what  if this happened with with pacman there  were a few games like that there were a  few  uh henry hatsworth so i'll just give you  guys a counter argument  henry hatsworth am i getting it right  for a nintendo ds  okay  so this is an example of a game uh i've  got it listed here as being worth 60  dollars  this is very rare  today the vast majority the vast  majority of games for the nintendo ds  are worth zero and all platforms the  whole history of video games this stuff  is now basically worth its packaging  it's worth packaging and shipping cost  right  and it's interesting because people  let's let's be clear here people  perceive these as collectors items with  great intrinsic value and they're not  and they're not partly because of  fungibility replaceability these these  these forms of competition we're  discussing okay so until the year  2022 like up until  today  if you wanted to play henry hatsworth so  what am i going to do i'll give you guys  a link  who the hell who's even heard of henry  hatzer this is now a valuable collection  another example um the version of giana  sisters for the nintendo ds i think  that'll cost you about a hundred dollars  uh that for no not not a big deal  i don't even know this website they're  selling it for about 50 okay i don't  want to endorse this website so whatever  okay these are these are games that  today you could pay 50  you could pay 100  why okay  the first edition of henry hatsworth is  the only edition it was never published  for any other platform it was never made  available for nintendo switch or  playstation 4 or playstation vita it was  only made to run on one system and then  disappeared never again and that system  until today until 2022 is changing now  it was only playable on the original  hardware the only way to play a nintendo  ds game was to actually own a physical  ds now that's changing  today  all right right now i believe 2022 is  the first year ann burnett in china  started putting out portable new  portable systems  where you can play a nintendo ds game  without owning any nintendo hardware  none of your money goes to nintendo and  where you can download and play for free  the entire library of nintendo ds so i  have no reason to think henry hatsworth  is going to continue going up in value i  have no reason to think that the ds  version of giana sisters is is going up  in value right but those were examples  of something where the first edition was  the only edition it's actually scarce  they're actually these constraints but  with the progress of technology even for  those exceptions to the rule but we're  not talking about mario we're not  talking about sonic we're not talking  about pac-man something quite obscure  right where the first edition was the  only edition right  even that technological progress erodes  and eventually destroys their their  value where it will become a situation  we'll say well what if it's just  sentimental value why do you want to pay  50 or 100 for an original cartridge  of either of these games anyone  instantly for free can play them on any  hardware you can play it on your laptop  you can play it on your mobile phone  that's going to happen for the ds as i  say you can have this it hasn't happened  yet or it's happening right now for that  system with all these other systems  that's already happened i've never done  this but people tell me you can do at  least playstation 2 on my mobile phone i  have a cheap mobile phone i was  surprised to say no playstation 2 is  fine on this mobile phone so not just  playstation 1 but you can mobile phones  are able to gobble up more and more not  just of the old  16-bit or 32-bit market mobile phones  can do everything your laptop can do  everything different it's all it's all  fungible it's all exchangeable okay  so we're looking at this science fiction  book  i say again again there are two  possibilities  one is  that the first edition is the only  edition it's actually scarce but the  other possibility is it was that rare  book it was that one in a million book  that had a hit movie made out of it it  was that rare book that was published  and repost again and again and again had  a second edition a third edition a 10th  edition right  but for that century for that period of  time 1880 to 1980 either way you could  be certain  50 years from now the first edition this  book is going to be worth more than its  cover price today you could buy it for  five dollars completely certain  hey there are two possibilities  it's a flop the first edition is no  audition then it's valuable due to  scarcity or two it's a hit  and then the first edition is valuable  because of fame like  of course sorry lord of the rings as an  example of course any any corner store  you can buy lord of the rings anywhere  who can count the 200th edition of lord  of the rings right it's ubiquitous but  because of its fame people want to own  the first edition so it becomes valuable  also right now again this happened also  with medium-sized success stories in  science fiction isaac asimov's  uh foundation series the first edition  is worth something that's not a huge  success it's not like star trek  but the first edition is worth something  even though it's been reprinted again  again obviously dune  we saw that recent bookstore how many  copies of dune did the bookstore have  for sale it's crazy of course you can  get anywhere you can get it for five  dollars game free then because the fan  all right so  this is what i was saying is the one  aspect that is  talked about the extent which  the value of an item the value of an  investment the value of a product  partially  derives from our perception of its  future value  so look i want to say this i don't know  if you still here in the audience we've  got here called generation x in the  audience he is  an optimist about bitcoin about  cryptocurrency so another nfts if you  don't know what this stuff is don't  don't google it you don't want to know  don't let it ruin your life okay  what is the value of an nft today  what portion of the value of that  investment is based on the perceived  it's perceived or assumed  future value right  the value of bitcoin bitcoin has almost  zero use value right almost zero  but you have a perception or an  assumption that it's going to be worth  more money in the future all right what  percentage of its value today is that  assumption about its future value right  and what if that's wrong  now there are a whole lot of reasons why  it should be right and my conviction is  that it is wrong i think you know i am  i'm a bitcoin critic whatever i say you  know i'm a to say i'm a skeptic would be  false because it's not that i'm a  skeptic i'm actually opposed to it  including morally frankly i'm really i'm  a bitcoin debunker you know put it that  way really hostile to bitcoin  and cryptocurrency right but now you're  in a situation where  its current value is based on its  perceived future value and a lot of  things in this life a lot of books  especially right oh if you don't buy  this now for a hundred dollars this is  going to be the only way to play this  game this is going to be the only way to  read this book  there's no other way what happens when  that  disappears we're living through it right  now we're living through the death of  scarcity in intellectual property the  death of scarcity in the publishing  industry the death of scarcity and  everything else and again um  we want to believe  instinctually  that the success of one generation paves  the way for the success of the next like  oh it's thanks to the success of the  sega master system that we have the  success of the sega genesis and then  it's thanks to the success of the sega  genesis that we have the success of the  sega saturn the thanks to playstation 2  that we have playstation 3 right and i'm  not saying that's that's completely  insane like you know there's a sense in  which that's true  the sega company was only able to make  the sega genesis because they already  had they were only able to get the  investment to do that because they had  some proven success  with earlier videoing consoles to my  knowledge looking to who actually were  the investors that made the sega genesis  possible it might be a very interesting  story like who the actual people were  who sat down at a board meeting said  okay we're gonna each put in 10 million  dollars to make this because it's a lot  of money right  i described to you before you know the  theater  we want to put on a production of cats  in tallahassee florida okay we're going  to do a stage play of cats you've got to  bring together some really rich people  in a room you've got to have a board  meeting and say look guys here are the  plans here are the projected costs here  are the projected revenues  you got you gotta really stand you gotta  do a pitch meeting and then they've  gotta put their money together and it's  on a smaller scale that's what happens  in the publishing industry too you wanna  have a hitbook people are gonna have to  invest money people have to make  executive decisions about about making  the book and again what happens  what happens when the the the assumed  future value of this is zero or is it  close to zero just uh  just a few months hence okay we want to  think about  each stage of development  as paving the way forward as possibly  creating the basis for the success of  the next asia development creating the  platform for the next digital right  but what if the opposite is true  to an even greater extent right what if  there can't be  another sonic the hedgehog because in a  very real sense any new innovation is  overshadowed by  that past innovation right and that past  success i don't just mean the reputation  and fame that it's achieved that's an  important factor  how good is your new video game when it  has to compete with the excellence of  every single video game that's ever  existed in the past all of which are  competing for the limited attention span  of your audience the ultimate constraint  is time  right  how many hours do you have to play video  games and now why would you pay 80  dollars so expensive these new but  eighty dollars fifty dollars is a cheap  game a new game why would you do that  when you can play anything from the  whole library of video games to the past  again including even things that came  out six months ago  two years ago doesn't doesn't have to be  retro in that sense the discounts on a  game that came out two years ago you  know eighty percent off ninety percent  off download now the eshop whatever  right when you have to compete with not  just sonic the hedgehog but the library  the combined  brilliance the combined excellence of  every video game ever made in the past  all right  every new book that comes out today  has to compete with william shakespeare  every new detective novel has to compete  with agatha christie whoever want to say  is the shakespeare of of detective  novels you know what i'm saying  you have to compete with hercule paul  rowe so on and so forth  right and from an investment standpoint  right  how can we justify paying you  in advance when we are certain your new  book  is going to make less money than if we  just reprint shakespeare if we reprint  agatha christie the new innovation for  the producers  is worth less money and much less  reliable money than just recycling and  exploiting the greatest hits from the  past again again that's the producer's  perspective then from the consumer's  perspective they're saying why should i  buy your book for forty dollars  i can read any book  from the whole history of english  literature for zero or just for the cost  of shipping for pennies or maybe for  five dollars  your detective novel has to compete for  my time my interest and my money not  just with william shakespeare not just  with atheistic people with a combined  excellence of everything your culture  has accomplished in the past okay  this is a kind of chronological  competition i think nobody talks about  and nobody thinks about it and it it it  takes away from us the solution of oh  isn't it great agatha christie created  this genre of books that now i get to  succeed in she paved the way she created  this platform again playstation 2  created the platform for playstation 5  yeah that's partly true  but the success of agatha christie the  economic success of authors in the past  can in a very material and palpable  sense make it impossible for you to  succeed as an author today the the  innovation that took place in the past  can snuff out and preclude  innovation and present  so i'm going to use a an image here from  the theater because i think it's easier  to visualize i mean some of these try to  make them palpable you know so we're not  just dealing with abstractions on a on a  chalkboard okay  let's say i'm completely convinced that  i have the most brilliant idea  for a new play  a new drama  about  ancient rome  about the rise and fall  of julius caesar  i'm going to call it the death of caesar  and i'm i'm just so confident again this  could be a person who's confident  they're going to make a video game  that's better than sonic the hedgehog  well how much better  is it so much better that people won't  play the original sonic hedgehog for  free they're going to pay 50 for your  new version of some of it really it's  going to be that good is that is that  even possible and if you're asking me to  invest  you want me to invest a million dollars  to take that gamble really see  um  if you sit down with the board of  directors you gather together a bunch of  wealthy people in tallahassee florida  let's just say okay so look i'm gonna  put on  julius caesar it's a new  julius caesar written by a nobody  it's a no name just says it's new the  writer isn't famous the board of  directors if they're really going to be  honest with you they will sit there and  say  i'm sorry economically this doesn't make  sense  we will make more money we'll have more  people sitting in the seats we'll have a  bigger audience if instead we put on  william shakespeare's julius caesar  that's what the audience exists for  that's the market to manage this for if  you don't believe me  just think it through  what if the investors are so generous  and say hey how about we do both  how about we have two theaters  in tallahassee  simultaneously perform  this play this drama about julius caesar  okay and one of them the posters say  william shakespeare's julia's sister  caesar and the other one says  julius caesar a new play by isil mazar  by some guy you've never heard of before  no name writer now look the new play it  can be better  it can be i could i'm not going to boast  here i think i i could feel completely  confident i could write a better play  about julius caesar than william  shakespeare did in what sense better  for one thing i could write a play  that's more relevant to the politics of  the 21st century i can write about  julius caesar in a way that's meaningful  to people today i was not shakespeare's  intent different historical context i  can list off for you a whole bunch of  ways in which i can write a better  choice easier how about just the  comprehensibility of the script for the  audience there's a lot of vocabulary  there in shakespeare that the audience  really struggles with i want to reach  the people of tallahassee florida in the  21st century you know i'm going to write  about it in a way that they can relate  to you know whatever you know there are  a whole bunch of ways in which i can  save you i'm 100 confident i can write a  better play than shakespeare we can put  on a better play than shakespeare right  but economically  i can't compete  all right the creativity the brilliance  the innovation of the present  cannot compete  with the innovation the brilliance the  creativity of the past  the success of william shakespeare is  actually snuffing out the possibility of  anyone myself included writing an  original hit play about the tragic death  of of julius caesar  and you would you could just visualize  it we have two different theaters  in the same city producing these two  different plays  people have heard of shakespeare it's  partly reputational value right it's  partly the brand name that can go on for  centuries that can go on forever right  oh shakespeare isaac asimov you know oh  there's a new movie being made about an  old  isaac asimov novel what chance do you  have of writing a science fiction book  today that's going to rise to that level  of reputation and going to be adapting  to a movie and again even if you do both  what if the investors are really  generous they say okay well look  we're going to do both we're going to do  isaac asimov's movie about robots and  you know what kid you knew no name kid  just you kid nobody suck you also wrote  an interesting script about robots we're  going to do both simultaneously but you  know what  we're going to give a 100 million budget  to the isaac asimov movie and you get a  10 million dollar budget because we're  completely certain  more money is to be made there in the  retro  cinema world we see a retro video games  don't say retro there's more money in  retro publishing  for the audience they're more interested  in retro reading they can read all the  greatest minds of so many centuries  right they're not really interested in  your in your uh creative potential you  know we're going to give them a 100  million dollar budget because we are  certain that is the movie that's going  to be a hit that's going to reach a  larger audience and and this movie about  robots with the title nobody's heard of  before written by a guy nobody's here  for that that is a pretty small shot of  reaching a significant uh audience of  making uh  making making a lot of money okay guys  so look from my perspective  we could wrap it up here with the one  hour mark i've made the argument i can't  make i'm going to read and reply to your  your comments melissa already made an  interesting comment so guys if you have  something intelligent to say hit the  thumbs up you you 45 people have been  sitting here for one hour and you just  couldn't make up your minds if you were  gonna thumbs up or not i asked you 45  people sit here for an hour you can't  hit the thumbs up button okay  interestingly a bunch of people just  laughed when i said i was going to wrap  up the video but the most interesting  part of the video is still coming little  do you suspect so look guys if you're  sitting on the fence you can change your  mind later you can hit thumbs down later  if you think this video turns to crap  but if you want to hit thumbs up if you  have an intelligent thing to say i will  read your comments and respond in just a  moment but uh melissa gets first  first place first dibs first dibs what  is the etymology of the word dib there  you go  uh so melissa made actually an  interesting comment that i hadn't  thought about before at all oh okay  i hadn't thought about it today  i think we have i think we have  conversation i talked about this before  um  i've said in this video  today nobody gets to be william  shakespeare because we already had a  shakespeare like we have this really  strange sense in which the quantitative  build up  of um writing in the past  negatively impacts you know  innovation production of new writing in  the present future um  [Music]  okay what about  youtube  what if the problem isn't just that  there can never be another pac-man there  can never be another space invaders  another another example there could have  been another star wars  it's an interesting one to think about  you know  um  there can never be another dune  you know okay what if  you know  what if there can never be another  pewdiepie uh what if the opportunity i  mean in each category what if there  could never be another  test bag what if they're gonna i mean  you know test bag she rose and fell for  him  what if there could never be another  nina and randa  you know my point is to include here  people who really weren't very talented  and who didn't put any great effort into  their youtube videos and nevertheless  had enormous fame and enormous success  you are competing against  someone like pewdiepie who's already  established who already exists and  you're competing against the accumulated  brilliance and uh yeah  shane dawson there's a great example  will there be another shane dawson or is  that an opportunity that came once more  forever now so it's just an interesting  suggestion melissa made to me like oh  you could you could apply this analysis  to youtube also well what's different  about youtube is that for the viewer it  always was free right it always was zero  cost or as close to zero cost as  possible and i remember when i got  started on youtube the really kind of  toxic sense of entitlement the audience  had i remember that there was this sense  of like  you work for me like the audience  talking to me like i'm their employee  and it's like bro  you think i make one dollar out of this  video you know it's really strange and  people people were used to this kind of  effusive attitude from the the  broadcaster like oh thank you so much  for your support guys be sure to like  share and subscribe you know there's all  this there's really weird set of  assumptions built in so if you want you  want to say something you know but i was  going to say youtube is different  because from day one it was presumed to  be zero cost by the audience the  audience never thought they'd pay an  admission fee they never thought they'd  pay to watch your movie or watch your  monologue or whatever it is you do  and it was always presumed to have a  future value of xero this is something  people presume would be free to download  on the internet now it'd be free to  download forever you know and um there  was no no nobody thought of collecting  uh or or even owning you know youtube  videos now in reality some of it has  become scarce a lot of youtube channels  were deleted and disappeared and a lot  of people wished they had downloaded it  and saved it in a hard drive there's a  real question of would that be worth  money if you had the archives of what  are otherwise deleted and disappeared  youtubers what is that worth  um because there you have real real  scarcity but this was  the difference is there's no  1880 to 1980 period  this is instead something that from the  beginning had those assumptions baked in  but nevertheless i remember what melissa  said i thought was was very interesting  there's a lot of truth to it there's  nevertheless this sense in which  um  success on youtube now  is somehow eroded or undermined or  destroyed by success in the past  and people talk about that in their own  way they talk about early adopters  having advantages and then the  opportunities disappear there's a kind  of  language we have to to talk about these  things  um  but yeah  reaching  5 000 views per video that seems so  effortless so easy so attainable in say  2014  and  it's it's really hard today it's really  unlikely today  and  you know i guess my hesitation here is  just to say to what extent is that  because  whatever you're doing has been done  before and it's already available so  it's for some genres of videos that's  the case for some germans it's very  close what i'm saying about books  uh so i'll give you an example of a hit  video on my channel i made a video about  how to get a good grade on the  intelligence test for the canadian army  based on my own experience when i  applied for and joined the canadian army  spoilers didn't last long i was i was  volunteering to go fight against isis  and the war  didn't happen for purely bureaucratic  paper reasons and it turned out the war  against isis didn't last that long but i  signed up to fight guys  anyway so i made a video it's an  instructional video about how to study  for and write and do well on that  intelligence test and it has a huge  number of views i'm sorry i could check  but it's huge  i believe at that time that was the only  youtube video on that topic  and  it might have been the only  video on the whole of the internet like  there was nowhere else you could go so  if anyone put into google oh how do i  study for the intelligence test for the  army how do this again it's not that big  of a mark this is canada it would have  more views it was the american test or  some the chinese test or something but  canada is a small country in terms of  population a lot of empty landmass but  small  and you know there are several thousand  people per year who continue clicking on  and watching that video  can you have that success again can you  make a new video  so there we get the same pattern where  the question is now look i'm not saying  that video is a masterpiece any one of  you in the audience  might say so someone just checked they  say the video is over 50 000 views now  so yeah for my channel that's a huge hit  and for canada for something that's you  this this video is only interesting to  people in canada who are applying to  join the army not even the people  already in the army it's people who are  about to go into the army it's a very  specific audience in a small country so  i got 50 000 views so here's my question  if you think you can watch that video  and you think you know this video is not  that great  it was just so so if you feel that you  can make a better video on that topic  how much better is it going to be  that you'll take the success away from  me that you'll displace my video from  its position of fame even as micro fame  you know that you are going to be the  next agatha christie so to speak you  know nobody's gonna click on my video  anymore they're gonna they're gonna  click on yours and that is in a context  where watching either video costs the  viewer nothing you're not asking them to  even pay five dollars to buy a book or  five dollars to  buy a video game where there's really no  you know people can click on both right  there's no reason i think though it's  true  you know there is nevertheless this  hurdle to get over oh there already is a  video on that there already is a  successful video on that there's already  a video that's kind of known or  established or famous on that now i  would think that would be true of many  other instructional videos of that kind  you know um obviously there are some  other types of videos where that could  never be the case if i make a youtube  video well okay okay i'm arguing against  myself i was about to say if i make a  youtube video about joe biden's latest  report which i've done so joe biden  publishes a report so by definition  nobody else could have made a a youtube  video about that the report was  published that day let's say so there's  only a few hours where someone could  read the report analyze it and then give  an error to that discussion of it so  there have been things like that they've  been historical there have been  historical and political issues uh where  i was either the first person i was  among the first person to youtube  lindsey graham being homosexual is a  better  uh better topic there was this  breaking news that was only on twitter  at that point it wasn't even in the  newspapers yet and i made a video  talking about the politics of whether or  not lindsey graham is homosexual one of  people saying that he's homosexual  uh in the 21st century things have  certainly changed melissa just read an  article about ed [ __ ] or ed koch i  should say sorry  uh but yeah mayor of new york mayor ed  koch and the politics surrounding his  homosexuality and and so on so for me an  interest okay you can look at that and  say well  with breaking news with something that's  really new and different  you could optimistically say then you  can compete then you don't have this  problem being overshadowed by the past  even if  tyt  is so much worse than me even with what  i'm producing is so much better than tyt  this is a rival youtube channel right  99 of the market is gonna get their news  from tyt instead because tyt was here  they they were the first monetized  youtube channel it is said on the  internet so far as i know they were the  first partner youtube channel first  youtube get a partnership and start  getting paid by youtube for uploading  content and  i'm completely confident basically i  don't think there's a single political  issue on which i couldn't make a better  youtube video than tyt maybe if i think  about it i'll think okay you know what  turkey jank wieger knows more about the  politics of turkey so legit not every  topic there are some topics they know  more about i just don't care that much  about the politics attorney so you can  argue jenk weaker can talk about the  politics industry of turkey but okay  with a few exceptions uh there are  innumerable political topics on which  i'm completely certain  i can make a better youtube video than  tyt and i can make a better youtube  video than cnn and i can make a better  youtube video than fox news no question  what percentage of the market goes to  tyt  cnn and [ __ ] is partly just because  they already exist  so yeah um mutatus mutandus the same  problem the same pattern exists within  youtube even when we don't have to deal  with cost of distribution we don't have  to deal with the cost of collecting we  don't there's no second hand market when  all those other factors are taken out of  it some of the same  dynamics are dynamism some of the same  problem with  today's innovation today's creativity  today's writing today's research being  undermined and eroded by  that of yesteryear it continues to be a  problem  so credit to melissa she that that uh  that section of the video was uh  inspired or suggested by her  we have a bunch of suggestions that i  should make a video game about julius  caesar  using unreal engine 5.  right uh i don't think i need to get in  the details someone said i do understand  why they're saying this uh nintendo ds  emulators so 2ds 3ds and so on it says  they can't really fully emulate what  it's like to play an original uh ds okay  right but dude  20 years ago we could have said that  about pac-man too right like  really like you know but can you really  capture  arcade pac-man it's still an issue right  but with the progress of time and that's  why i said this is something that's  changing right now for the nintendo ds  whereas it already changed past we have  we can contrast here directly like  within this apartment uh you know you  can contrast original famicom real  famicom hardware to uh you know  emulation there are differences there's  a gap right but the gap gets right and  at one point it was an insuperable gap  at one point like as you say it's just  impossible to play ds at one point it  was impossible to play gamecube on  emulation each of these systems they  have their period of it being impossible  then it goes from impossible to possible  then it goes from possible to easy then  it goes to being such high quality that  they're indistinguishable or where the  emulation is better than the original so  especially for 3d era games i'm sorry  but uh nintendo 64. it's better emulated  than original nintendo 64 fake is better  than real i've never done it but you  know playstation one people say that  about it's very easy for me to imagine  playstation one will be better on an  emulator than on originally original  reviews the crispness of the rendering  and the polygons and some of the ways in  which you can improve the graphics uh  through emulation so yeah i don't want  to get into an in-depth and detailed  discussion about emulators but again  you're not  i'm not offended that you said this but  you're not undermining my original point  even if the original video game on  original hardware is better  all right which may be true with  nintendo ds it may even be true with the  an 8-bit system like the famicom really  not joking even with 8-bit games  original hardware may be better okay  but  if you are comparing paying fifty  dollars to paying five dollars is it  that much better  and you may be comparing paying  more than fifty dollars to less than  five dollars if the emulated version of  the game doesn't matter if it's nintendo  ds or playstation 2  even if you think the emulated version  is slightly worse if you think the  original is slightly better how much of  a price gap does that justify and for  how many people like there still is a  market for original hardware right you  want to measure how many thousand people  it is or how many thousand people want  to pay 50 for that and how many million  are willing to download it for free so  again with books  same issue now sorry i mean for me this  is my ultimate concern  i cannot earn a living  writing a new history of napoleon  bonaparte nobody will pay me i won't get  a publisher's advance up front i won't  get money to do the research i could go  out and  write the book which could involve also  translating resources paying a  translator to work with going to  archives you know there are costs to  making a book there was a time when  a writer could actually get paid in  advance to do that because the publisher  be sure to make money i can't do that  for napoleon  and if i do with my own money i ask my  mother to give me money to pay write a  book about napoleon in my family that's  possible i could ask my mother to  bankroll my research into napoleon  bonaparte i'm tempted to do that with a  more obscure figure governor morris i'm  very tempted to get some money together  do a research project on governor morris  and there have been books already  written about them but i'd like to write  a new and different and better one i'd  like to do the research on governor  morris but okay  i  if my mother gives me a couple thousand  dollars so i can go and live in poverty  and research and write a book about  napoleon can i get it published  like already that's never hurdle because  no publisher thinks they can make money  out of this book with napoleon how good  is my book in the point it has to  compete with every other book ever  written about napoleon right how much  money can it earn for the publisher how  much money can earn for me in that  competitive context when all the books  written in the past are available for  five dollars on paper or absolutely for  free as a download so it's snuffing out  my ability to engage in original  research and authorship and that's even  for something as mainstream as napoleon  what if it's not as mainstream as  deployment what if it's cambodia what if  it's myanmar  right  there's a lot of research in important  fields of  politics what have you that's not  happening  i was looking for years i stopped and  not doing anymore i was leaving for  years for an evaluation a really  scholarly evaluation in english of the  chinese health insurance system and the  reforms to health care in communist  china because i knew i was caring about  them and during the years when i checked  there's one of those things where like  once a year or once every six months or  something i would check around as anyone  does this there was nothing in english  there was zero that research would cost  money you know i mean it's not easy to  reach china is a huge country in case  you had both in terms of population and  geography what the hell happened in  chinese healthcare both health insurance  and the actual you know and the  education system connected to in the  hospitals and how it all actually works  it's an incredibly it's an incredibly  important question frankly how can we  talk about reformed health care in the  united states of america without  referring to what's happened in china it  should be part of the comparative  analysis we should also talk about  england and france we should use all  kinds of examples not gonna be wrong but  i mean china is  it's the single biggest example in the  world and in the history of the world  nobody's gonna do that research nobody's  doing their very nobody's going to  publish it and this  you know the economics  matter  in this sense of competing with  everything that ever came before you  know it matters also so this is this is  my ultimate concern but sure i think  it's i think it's very sad and  significant even in even in fiction  um so look i hate this but i've no i've  never read the catcher on the right but  it's not a book i think i've possibly  covered okay self-pitying middle-aged  white man book you know whether it's you  think of the catcher and the ride i  think of woody allen or something  as much as i may despise woody allen as  much as i may despise a book like the  catcher in the rye or whatever you know  what if there is never going to be  another woody allen there's never going  to be another catcher on the ride  there's never going to be writing of  this kind even within  within fiction  you know that's a that's a huge change  and you know where  part of it is just that the recycling of  the the creative accomplishments of the  past starts to overshadow and snuff out  and undermine  innovation in the present future  so i think the video game being proposed  here about julius caesar it's very  unlikely to happen  and um let me ask you if you got  together some investors  some multi-millionaires in a room  he said hey we've got two projects we  knew here i know this really brilliant  unestablished author isil mazzar this  guy was in no way famous or rose davis  and uh we can do isil mazzard's julius  caesar so this is going to be a a video  game made in unreal engine five it's  gonna be a video game on  playstation five you know we can do that  or  we can go with william shakespeare  who's gonna sell more video games okay  so everything i've already said before  actually would apply apply to this also  you know and what's going to make more  money you know  my original innovative julius caesar  game or just reissuing  virtua fighter 2 by sega arcade virtua  fighter 2 is going to make like taking  something from the past like that and  putting it on new hardware and if if  those investors as individuals have to  choose maybe that's the choice they have  well on the whole i'm going to put the  money into sega's virtua fighter 2  reissue i think that's going to earn  back the 10 million dollars i'm i'm  putting out this yeah  right so this is another interesting  asymmetry uh moonin smith who's become  my most prolific uh commentator here or  commenter commenter not commentator um  says quote alex becker uh taught himself  how to program in 30 days and he was  able to design and recreate doom  eternals doom turtle is a particular  video game uh using free resources so  i think he's implying that he is in a  very short time that one person working  alone with these resources was able to  recreate something for best right and so  this is what i want to emphasize though  there is such a big gap between creating  and recreating right i think what's  being said here is is true very broadly  not just about video games but also  about theater also about movies um it's  quite easy  to uh so let's think of any hit movie  from the past here i know this has  happened there's quite a few movie  remakes  um there was a movie that that posed  itself as a uh was promoted itself as a  shot for shot remake of psycho  uh the original film cycle was by alfred  hitchcock so this was a new version of  alfred hitchcock's psycho i'm not a fan  of alfred hitchcock by the way you know  of course you know if you go to any  movie studio you'd say oh we're just  going to make again the same movie  someone made 50 years ago we're going to  do a new version of so we're having  obviously new actors new cameras but the  same script i mean again you could do it  as a shot for shot remake all the  cinematography is already done for you  all the thought yeah that's easy  remaking a video game that already  existed  that's easy right making something new  is hard and it's hard  partly because of risk because you have  to make the commitment you personally  have to take the risk to press into the  unknown to write something nobody's ever  read before you know it's challenging to  the audience it's challenging to the  author right it's challenging to the to  the creator and of course you're taking  the risk it's going to be a flop in  in 10 different ways making something  really new and really different  um and who is going to bankroll that who  is going to be able to pay their rent  doing that obviously i care about that  much more for books  than i do for for video games i care  about to some extent with theater and  cinema too i think it's a question  that's that's worth asking thinking  about  um  and you know a huge percentage of the  big budget projects today are in this  sense retro i'm sorry but they're  they're remaking  marvel comic books from the 1970s it's  ridiculous and people are willing to  invest millions of dollars to have yet  another  1970s comic book like moon night made  into a movie and a tv show and this kind  of thing oh oh here's a slightly good  idea someone had once in avengers comics  in the 1970s and it becomes a  multi-million dollar film budget well  i just say there's a retro element here  and it's leaning on proven known names  people already know who spider-man is  but who can really do something as new  and original as spider-man was when it  was first when it first came out who's  out there really innovating and  economically simply not even talking  about getting rich  who can pay their rent really being an  innovator really being a creator in the  culture of the 21st century and guys my  answer is  not me  i i sorry this is not meant to be a  self-pitying video but throughout my  whole life people said to me you should  write for a newspaper you should write  for a magazine people at different times  this is before i had a youtube channel  too when i was doing a lot of writing  people said to me oh you're such a  talented writer you should do this you  should do that and what i had to say is  i'm sorry look at the calendar give that  advice to someone 50 years ago 50 years  ago i could have earned a living in  those uh  i've had those conversations with my  father and so my father's now deceased i  just didn't know you you have to realize  sorry i'm not meaning to make this the  topic of the video but it is significant  when i was in high school i was paid 300  per article to write articles for a  local toronto magazine it was a  how probably a couple hundred people  read that magazine wasn't even it wasn't  a huge international uh successful  magazine or something um i'm sorry  probably distributed across canada to  some extent probably some copies were in  montreal or a few other places you know  today you know you can't get three  hundred dollars an article to write for  national international publications at  the i mean how you can't live as a  journalist you can't live as a writer  even if you're not thinking about  becoming uh fabulously wealthy and again  that has knock-on effects for the  publishers for the investors for  everyone else for most industry and as i  say i said it only once in this video  but that's what i see happening with the  future of video games too i think  they're going to become something more  like the opera they're going to be some  become an area of the creative arts uh  where it's predominantly not for-profit  motivations that are shaping what's  going on in terms of creativity and  innovation  but yeah look  this impacts me this impacts my life  there's research i can't do there's  writing i can't do because there's no  expectation of it ever generating money  and there's no expectation that i could  even reach a significant audience that  could reach a few thousand readers right  and again  as much as we talk about competing for  money i've also said this you're  competing for people's time  people only have so much time why should  they read your book about julius caesar  instead of reading william shakespeare's  book about julius caesar why should they  read your book about napoleon bonaparte  instead of the 10  best sellers about napoleon bonaparte we  could rank famous  respected books by people who have  famous names that are already out there  they're on the bookshelf competing with  you about napoleon bonaparte they're  competing at a lower price with a  greater reputation  right and ultimately even if people are  so wealthy they don't care even if  people will pay 50 for your book when  this other book is available for five  dollars they only have so much time they  only have so much time to read a book  about napoleon bonaparte they only have  so much time to watch a play about  julius caesar so  you lose so our generation loses and for  the next generation it's going to be  even worse  so we start to go into  fundamentally a culture of stasis  we become a curatorial culture rather  than an innovative culture and i as with  something as intrinsically conservative  as julius  shakespeare pardon me with something as  as intrinsically conservative as the  history of julius caesar like there's  something conservative there it's about  something from the past that's set in  stone literally and figuratively you  know  i think there actually is a really  important need for innovation for new  voices for new perspectives on julius  caesar you know i i think there is a  need for innovation even with something  as backward looking as that okay but  tell me  who is writing you know who is writing  the equivalent uh play about the tragedy  of  america's army in iraq who wrote the  great drama of the american army in  afghanistan who now is writing about you  know the the war in ukraine and so on  you know you can look at things that are  like i think we do need innovation and  creativity and looking back at  julius caesar we do need innovation and  creativity and looking back at napoleon  bonaparte and partly because we need to  draw new moral conclusions we need to  apply  lessons from the past to the present  um  if you make a movie today about the  vietnam war it competes against every  other movie that's ever been made about  the vietnam war and those movies are  available for free their instant  download for free or  maybe five dollars maybe just the cost  of printing and shipping but you know  that's what you're competing with you  know if you have no name you don't have  a famous name your movie is a famous  name how do you compete with all the  movies that already exist about the  vietnam war now again as you know this  hasn't resulted in absolutely zero new  movies being made about the vietnam war  but  i said originally it's an issue of  proportionality  when sega genesis came out people were  still buying atari 2600 games right  but we have moved on to a phase with a  retro part of the market for video games  it's a larger and larger proportion of  the market i it i can't say it dominates  the market but i can certainly say it  shapes the market right and yes the  accumulated literature of the past in a  very important sense is snuffing out the  production of literature  for and about the future  so uh the only thing i'd say here  various intelligent comments thanks to  your contributions guys and uh by the  way hit thumbs up if you have if you  have a moment to do so it'll help more  in this case it won't help more people  discover the video in future because  this video is going to be published on  my new channel from ink to ink so if you  didn't get that look in the description  this video will not be on the above sale  channel it will be on uh for make ink  um it's the first time i've done that  but  uh welcome to this bold new world in  which i have a separate channel for  talking about issues of this kind  i think the name of the channel is  self-explanatory but  maybe i'm going to get an avalanche of  fan mail asking me to explain it i've  always had fan mail asking me to explain  the meaning of a ballast yell  and also they ar ario  active research in foreign opinion so  whenever i think something is  self-explanatory i'm i'm probably wrong  um  so anyway someone says uh bob says quote  a lot of formerly super popular channels  are pretty dead now  the algorithm is quite cruel  so i just say it's not the topic of this  video i don't believe in the algorithm  i believe in human behavior like what  we're observing is not the algorithm  what we're observing are changes in real  human behavior you know what we are  seeing changes in what the what the  viewers actually actually do and see  and you know what they want to see what  they're interested in um  [Music]  and i wouldn't describe that as cruel  either you know i i wouldn't  um if you're a stand-up comedian and the  audience doesn't laugh at your joke i  don't think you can attribute that to  to cruelty either you are creating  videos for an audience or you're  creating it for yourself we could we  could run a security camera in our  kitchen showing us cooking we could do  that and make no effort to  then we wouldn't be able to have sex in  the kitchen  you could set up a camera and just  continuously broadcast  security footage of your kit so  sometimes it's empty sometimes you can  do that if you want to right and you  could take the attitude oh you don't  care how many people see it you're doing  it for yourself you're not doing phones  that may be literally true  you know um like you can get down to  those low ends or people say they're  just creating content for themselves and  they are you can write a book like a  diary where you are just writing it for  yourself diaristic writing exists that's  not what i'm talking about this video  and that's not what i do if i'm going to  do research and write about cambodia  it's for you it is as i said the start  of this video it is in a subtle sense to  change the world i'm going to research  and write about napoleon  it's for an audience it's for a viewer  it's it's in some way to change the  world i think that's the that's the  fundamental motivation that unites  fiction and non-fiction and it also  unites books and video games i mean i  think it unites theater film this is  something fiction and nonfiction the  creative arts all these endeavors really  really have in common but it  differentiates that whole world  from writing a diary where you're just  writing for yourself  and it is certainly possible to just  create youtube videos it's not for  anyone else it's for yourself this  exists  someone suggests a video game made about  sulla the emperor of rome uh so i didn't  want to get into the details of the  economic argument in this way partly  because i have talked about the past  someone states here optimistically and  totally incorrectly that independent  games on steam uh he just says they do  well  um no they don't and i've done research  on this and actually discussed it with  tommy talarico of all famous people  uh the economics of independent game  development  it is at best on a break-even basis  and um you have to find those rare  examples where developers were willing  to disclose the books open up the books  show where the money went and um i'm  sorry but i've talked through i just  don't want to talk about because i've  made youtube videos time in the past  when you look at the actual numbers of  even the most successful games that were  award-winning that were given bursaries  that had uh kickstarter type funding and  donations they don't and also we're  talking about games that were made by  just three people working together it's  horrifying to see that they may be money  losing or they they may really be like  everyone's paid minimum wage on that  basis it's just barely break even so no  the even the most success pardon me even  the most successful indie games you will  be horrified to see what the economics  are and then when you look at it from an  investor's  perspective from a creative artist  perspective we say okay if i invest in  this game  what are the chances it's going to be a  flop what are the chances going to be  only moderately successful and then what  are the chances that's going to be this  one in a million award-winning breakout  hit when you look at that economic  spectrum of of possibilities there's  basically no argument for supporting  indie games at all people do it out of  passion that people do it because they  love video games which is itself not  surprising but yeah i talked about that  with tommy talarico  and  you know  writing a book  doesn't cost you money in the same way  that making a film does or putting on a  live play does or or developing and  publishing a video game does software or  hardware for video games they both cost  money in terms of direct  material costs but what if writing a  book costs you two years of your life  you know what if it's two years of your  life  and then what are the likely outcomes  partly economic but partly in terms of  reaching an audience in terms of  millions of people reading it or just 10  000 people reading it right what's the  what's the spectrum possibilities there  so will you invest your money in that  and will you invest years of your of  your life in that it's  bleak it's terrifying it is dissuading a  whole generation from in any way getting  involved in the creative arts this way  and you have alternatives so just you  have to compare it to something i had a  friend who was a sculptor and he was the  first person i ever heard talk about  this sorry he was an aspiring sculptor  he wasn't a successful sculptor he  wanted to be an artist and be in  sculpture at the time i don't know what  he did with his life  but i remember um  he would uh gripe and in quite an  amusing way he would complain and gripe  about how  live musicians are the most  you know pampered and rewarded artists  of them all it's like look at these  people the canadian government has all  these birds they have free music lessons  and a conservatory and they're all these  music venues and the most mediocre  person can go and do a live gig and like  even if they're just paid 500 you paid  500 you have a live audience you perform  in front of these people they're all  these institutions that support you  you're played on the radio in toronto at  the time that was really true like new  bands trying to make it like a local  band there'd be these radio djs that  just to support them even if they  weren't that good so oh you know there's  a new band and they're they're playing  at the elma combo on thursday and the  radio would would announce your gig and  support you  if you want to be a writer there's  nothing like that i just wrote and  published a new book can i get a radio  interview can i get a radio interview in  my own hometown can i get a radio  interview on small  small time local radio no  is there going to be we have a local  newspaper here is there going to be a  newspaper article about me and my book  just the local newspaper just reaching  this city no but all of those things for  a musician right if you do like you do  lounge music you know it's a small  audience small venue live music you  start doing uh jazz music from the 1930s  as a lounge singer you're on the radio  you're in the newspaper and you're  getting paid  even if it's five hundred dollars per  gig as a writer you don't get 500  like even if it's 500 and soon enough it  becomes 3 000 per gig  i remember 50 cent saying that 50 cent's  not the most wise guy but i mean  remember this is really the world he  knows you remember him saying and he  didn't say it in an articulate or  charismatic way at all it was kind of  mumbling but he said that he had no  respect for broke rappers because he  said even if you are like an  unsuccessful rapper like you're not  famous like i mean he knew what that was  like because he had a face of his career  he said you make three thousand dollars  per show  so just grind just do a show  five nights a week just do it again and  again again even if you're making three  thousand dollars per show that starts to  add up you know like you're you're rich  just don't be lazy i mean that was what  he was complaining about he felt that  these new younger uh artists were lazy  they weren't willing to go out and do  five gigs a week which heat up he  alleges he had a period of time doing  before he got famous we was just touring  and touring touring and performing  performance getting a couple thousand  dollars here and there but you know  obviously that also applies to 500 per  show well 500 per show isn't much how  many shows can you do a month right  and maybe it's your part-time job maybe  it's your full-time job okay so that is  an area of creativity and innovation  that is in no way comparable to what  we're talking about here and um the type  of gamble you're talking about you know  anyway it's just not comparable if you  live in los angeles california and you  do  lounge music you're a live musician  doing language music what's your minimum  estimate for your level of success and  income like oh well you're not very  successful so you only get booked to do  gigs on like wednesdays and thursdays  but that's probably what it is like  you're a lounge act but you know that  much positive buzz people aren't really  that excited but  it's not that bad  you can live in l.a you can be doing  live music gigs on wednesday and  thursday and meeting interesting people  and you know you get the reward of the  audience hearing you you know and you  get to find your audience and your  audience finds you right  it's not that well the worst case  scenario for these other types of  creative endeavors it's really really  bad and guys  be honest i've never known anyone who  could even articulate their bitterness  about this  but i have known so many authors who  spent like 10 years of their life on a  book right they learned a new language  they went they went to the mountains of  myanmar they went from village to  village through a mountain range in  myanmar you know what i mean they  learned how to speak some obscure  language you know they did the research  they write they wrote the book they sunk  the years of life into it and you know  nobody ever read the book they didn't  make any money they didn't reach any  audience and they're they are really  bitter so this is one example you can  think of many examples of books people  work for five years on or 10 years on  and there may be money involved as well  as your own time and and tears and  effort  um i i this is a long story that i'm  going to try to make very short  but i met this guy who did quote unquote  photo books so he was a publisher just  of coffee table books big beautiful  coffee table books where each page is a  whole picture it's basically the format  you know  um now i've been in the publishing  industry as you know i know about these  things and i think any of you would say  right away oh it must be very easy to  sell those books compared to  something that looks like this must be  easy compared to saying hey i'm going to  write political philosophy and get 10  000 people to read my having a big  beautiful book  each page you know people want to have  this give it as a gift have it on a  coffee table it's a status symbol it's  beautiful it's you know  and i remember so this guy was the  publisher he he had uh he had made a few  books himself like he had been the  writer and photographer for a few books  he was primarily the publisher of book  book and i remember him saying to me and  it was really bitter it was so bitter he  said you know  we don't care  about the money  and we know that we can't sell that many  copies like the total range of sales is  between like zero and like a maximum hit  is 1 500 copies like that's what's  possible you know in this field you're  talking about you're struggling to sell  300 copies that's what you're talking  about you may have put 10 years of your  life in the book you may have five years  your life but you have all this work and  all this stuff he said  what we care about  is having the book on display in the  museum bookstore in the art gallery  bookstore so the author can feel it was  worth it like even if nobody buys it and  nobody agrees that it's on that that's  that and no i did not say anything to  this guy's face i didn't want to insult  him  but my wife at the time was there with  me my first wife you know and it's an  interesting time my life so i know  bookstores i know the book publishing  history i know museums i know art  galleries  a whole different chapter in my life i  know about that world  too  i remember you know  talking to  my first wife afterwards and saying you  know can you believe the attitude of  this guy like he he just  doesn't get it  if you want your book to be you know on  display  in that museum bookstore in that article  you have to be absolutely the best of  the best  and you have to compete with not just  every other book published this year  not just every book published in the  last 10 years  you are pub you are competing against  every book published  all time  they're selling in the museum bookstore  a collection of photographs by andy  warhol in  1985.  and it's like there's only so much space  in the bookstore right or they can send  you oh yeah [ __ ] you think your  books are so great dude you think your  books are great okay do you want to take  this spot away from andy warhol  that's who you're competing like we have  the greatest art books the greatest  photo book books photographs of  paintings journalism whatever whatever  it is like you have to go yeah this is a  book these are the most amazing  photographs from world war ii taken by  this artist who was out with the army  during world war ii some famous  photographer general oh you want us to  make space for your new book which is  photographs by some guy about some stuff  nobody's heard of the guy knows that  nobody cares oh you'd like me to you'd  like me to to make space for you by  getting rid of andy warhol by getting  rid of these world war ii oh really you  know  you are up against the best of the best  not from one moment not from one  generation right the museum is the  perfect emblem of that the art gallery  is perfect the accumulated brilliance  the accumulated creativity of a thousand  years  right  and  again just the hubris of that that he  felt entitled he felt that his  photographers his authors the people  creating these new books that they were  being wronged by being excluded from the  art gallery bookstore from the museum  bookstore  i think that shows the mismatch between  the attitudes of the of the generations  right and for that whole period 1880 to  1980 right you would know that book  would be worth more money in the future  you could buy it it's not going to  dude your books are worth nothing and  what's it going to be worth five years  from now you can have an 80 off sale for  these books after they've sat in your  warehouse like what what is this worth  and all these photographs so anyone said  they can see them on instagram because  you know  the book the book itself is obsolete  right in all these ways the transmit a  photograph between two people you know  this could be a pdf on the internet but  it could be an instagram account  like literally you could take each page  of the book and make each page one  photograph on instagram now that's  that's  to say it's obsolete is it understood  okay so some totally fine uh comments  here but take a slightly off topic  someone asks this intelligent question  i've nothing against this question we  have a lot of viewers from india these  days man i think people in india relate  to my um  toxic masculinity  i think the virtue discourse on this on  this channel appeals to a hindu viewers  i'd have had several hindu viewers write  to me  um anyway uh so um someone who i presume  is in india from his name writes in uh  asking quote i apologize for asking this  and i should probably just watch earlier  videos to fully understand your position  on video games and he says he will do  that but do you think video games have  no utility at all  close quote so it's it's a great  question and i like your way of phrasing  it it's not the way i would have i would  have phrased it right  people have asked me  why do i regard video games  as being so different from  movies  okay  [Music]  i have known people who collected movies  i remember one guy he had like a  bookshelf in his apartment the whole  wall of the apartment was just movies  accumulated in a huge book  right  so people buy movies people spend money  on movies people spend a certain amount  of time  watching movies i've never met anyone  who ruined their life  watching movies i never met anyone who  couldn't finish high school because they  were addicted to watching movies and  they never finished university because  they're addicted to watching movies  in a country the size the united states  of america maybe there are a few maybe  there are a few people who dropped out  of school because they were addicted to  watching movies all right  video games with my generation already  huge percentage of students ruin their  lives because of video games it's an  epidemic  right so that's my critique of idioms it  doesn't have to do with utility it has  to do with in plain english ruining your  life the possibility of it running off  the propensity  for it to ruin your life now i mean  there were jokes about this when pac-man  came out there was a satirical song by  weird al yankovic about pac-man ruining  your life right for that generation a  very few people were so obsessed with  playing video games did it ruin their  life  1978 1982  he got addicted to scramble the arcade  game  you know maybe got addicted to the  original tempest arcade game maybe the  number of hours you could spend playing  those games is limited  from one generation to the next  video games in this sense unironically i  really can say you they have become a  bigger menace when you talk to parents  today  you know some parents have to struggle  with a kid who becomes an alcoholic when  i was in scotland that's what parents  were worried about they're worried about  like already at 11 years old they were  worried about their kids drinking  whiskey you know kids could sneak  whiskey away 11 12 13. kids start doing  this kids start smoking cigarettes at  that age  that was the main worry then right now  today how concerned are you about your  kid getting involved with drinking  alcohol and smoking cigarettes compared  to video game edition video game edition  has become this massive overwhelming  soul-destroying life-altering uh problem  so that's that's the issue  um and it's in that context that i say  well the question of utility is is kind  of irrelevant to me i have bought video  games that teach you languages i have a  video game that's basically teach  yourself spanish i have several really  bad video games that are for teachers  self chinese i don't hate them but  they're not that great  if you want to talk about utility is  that hypothetically possible and  mysteriously nobody is addicted to  educational video games you know for  some reason that's not our problem as a  species so you know can hypothetically  video games have some utility sure and  have i have i seen that myself sure you  know but um that's very much in the  shadow cast by this propensity that i  have to ruin people's lives and by the  way  we stereotypically discuss this in  relation to young people same with  prostitution why do we only talk about  sexy teenagers getting involved in  prostitution aren't there middle-aged  women aren't there older women whose  lives are destroyed by prostitution like  you know there's this kind of bias  brought by the media that they're only  interested in sexy teenagers well video  games are mostly talked about in terms  of teaching  guys especially with the online games  they have the statistics so how old are  the people playing everquest  how old are the people playing um  runescape  you know there were a lot of middle-aged  and even elderly people addicted to  runescape today  you know so it's this cratering out  effect  frankly of the human species  cratering out of the  human intellect it's not just teenagers  it's this is a tremendous problem and  again i mean i've already stated it i  don't think it has to be a problem  you could play pac-man for 15 minutes a  week you could and that could not be a  problem  but the problem with video games is  there are a lot of people  as i say  i can't say nobody is like those movies  i personally have never known someone  addicted to playing movies i've never  known someone who told me  they were watching movies on saturday  and they started after they ate lunch  and then they just kept going till four  o'clock in the morning and they didn't  sleep all that night they just kept  watching one movie after another past  four am  six am and they were just ruined this  room and everyone everyone knows someone  who did that with videos or you've done  it yourself where you you got so  entranced so it's it's different you  know  oh we got a fan comment julius  shakespeare is a better name  you can name your kid that that's not  bad that's not if you name your kid  first name julius middle name  shakespeare  if your last name is smith julia  shakespeare smith or something kind of a  cute name  anyway  as you can see i'm catching up with your  comments guys we have something  tremendously meaningful and interesting  to say now is a good uh  oh  here's a billion dollar idea here is an  idea worth one million dollars  martin  martin says  quote  i have a good idea for a new video game  ready for this  it's a dating sim featuring tko sam  and the challenges he must overcome to  get laid and become an alpha male in  tokyo  wow  wow  wow  wow  [Laughter]  already i can think of all kinds of  great ideas for that game that's true  and it could be partly satirical and  partly sympathetic you could have a lot  of social and political commentary built  into that that could be a truly great  video game but maybe i mean you have to  decide maybe there's more than one mode  but i would think  at least one of the game modes the joke  is that you never you never get laid  that you play this game and you you know  it's just a perpetual process of failure  you fail in different ways again and  again and again and then until the game  concludes you know  maybe you have a difference between easy  mode and hard mode that way  great question would have to be a  separate uh separate video quote where  do you draw the line with honesty and  vulnerability on youtube  so great question melissa could make a  video about that too or something you  know but probably everyone could  you know  [Music]  i mean look for me  the question is what are you going to be  honest about  i feel like i'm 100 honest and i'm 100  vulnerable but i only talk about the  issues  i really feel are worth talking about  you know now i have had i've had viewers  complain to me i remember i received  something oh  you go on and on about these romances  with other women you had these crushes  you had in other women that didn't go  anywhere or something well i think  that's my perspective i think a very  small percentage of my youtube content  is talking about  my romance life that way or whatever  if i'm wrong i'm wrong guys i think  that's just a small percentage of this  video for example you know um but when  i've talked about it it's because i  really felt there was a point there's  something important for me to say for  the audience it's not that i'm writing  my diary  and  so you know for me that  that issue of selecting it in that in  that way where i really think it's  important then i feel  entitled to be a hundred percent honest  100 but i feel like there isn't a  problem with that  and maybe that would be more of a  problem if i were saying things that i  felt were  silly or trivial or  or self-indulgent i have had crushes on  women i've never talked about on youtube  you know what i mean i have you know  there's stuff like this and that's  normally the sort of thing people talk  about being honest being vulnerable but  like i have no hesitation talking about  the death of my father my relationship  with my father and being 100 honest 100  vulnerable because i think it matters  and put this way as a creative artist i  want to make it matter i want to tell  you that like that to me is not  self-indulgent or silly so of course  like i commit to it talking about i'm  100 honest and  quitting video games saying i talk about  you know whatever video game addiction  as a cultural phenomenon i don't think  that's trivial i don't think that's  silly so i'm going to really be honest  and really be vulnerable in talking  about it that's that's how i see it  but if your whole life is silly and  trivial if everything you have to talk  about is really shallow and  self-indulgent  then i think you're going to struggle  with honesty and vulnerability because  you're being honest and vulnerable  things that don't matter anymore  maybe don't matter to you you know  yeah so another question from martin  talks about video games that would help  you learn lotion or cambodian there are  there are games they're very poor  quality i've seen them on my mobile  phone i looked recently there are games  to help you learn lotion and cambodia  for many years i was talking to computer  programmers about that and trying to get  projects like that going and not just  for lotion not just for cambodia not  just for pali  for cree  ojibwe  mohawk you know for indigenous languages  den a  uh blackfoot the indigenous languages of  north america would be so important to  get video games in those languages so  for many many years i've talked to  people with that and many youtube videos  and  it ain't happening  it's a good joke but i have to explain  the joke  so it's a rare case for you really wait  you really cracked me up on camera with  that one that's good  so yeah  what i said about video games in  relation to uh small budget independent  games this person is saying a long time  uh subscriber do you want to give me the  kiss says the economics of aaa titles is  also on the edge and thus they're having  to resort to microtransactions vaporware  etc  yes  so i have also read a little bit about  that  let me just put it this way  big budget video games can lose money  they can they can be a loss  rather than a profit and there are  innumerable examples of that  um  and i think it's the same pattern i've  already talked about so we've most  thought about small budget video games  but still it's if it's only a million  dollars you're risking a million dollars  are you gonna earn a million dollars  back and you can get into tens of  millions of dollars with video game  budgets just like  cinema  um  [Music]  if you're an investor  what is the most reliable big budget  video game the most reliable  aaa video game it's the same with  william shakespeare it's going to be  shakespeare's julius caesar right it's  going to be another mario game it's  going to be another metric it's going to  be something derivative and not  innovative it's going to be something  neo-classical if you like so yes but  it's it's true what you say  um  big budget video games are also on the  edge and  you know cinema is really a tremendously  profitable  it's really the most profitable segment  of the creative world of the creative  economy it has been very reliably uh  profitable but i think that question has  to be asked um  there was a brief period  when amazon video was paying everyone  quite well i have a book about this  and there was all this optimism amongst  filmmakers in l.a oh you can sign up and  put your film on amazon and it pays a  certain amount  and then the money disappeared the money  tanked  um  how much money is there  in amazon buying up people's films and  putting them on their their video  service how much money is there in  netflix  obviously some people just look at the  most successful examples and then think  very optimistically about that you know  the book publishing industry too you say  oh look how much money harry potter made  you can write a book that makes most  dogs if you only look at the most  successful examples of books  of movies of streaming tv shows you know  uh and of big-budget video games  but boy really think about it as an  investor um  and what are the odds involved what's  the range of possible outcomes the type  of risk here is tremendous and again  people have an alternative you can do  stand-up comedy you can do be a live  music act doing lounge singing  not everything is like this so yeah  and look sorry what i'm hinting at is  the possibility that the future of  cinema this might be much more of a  problem for it it might be get become  harder to justify uh big budget movies  as well as smallish ones but for the  moment that's not the case for the  moment big budget films are so reliably  profitable that they still get hundreds  of millions of dollars whereas the risk  of doing a small budget film for example  making a documentary you want to make a  documentary movie about veganism you  want to make a documentary movie about  police brutality do you want to make a  documentary movie about corruption in  the election system  how much money is that  going to make  right so again this is the same uh sorry  i do think this is worth talking through  we'll wrap it up soon guys but you know  i do think it's the same kind of  self-deceptive uh thinking bob says and  thanks for your comments bob i realize  these are valentine's comments bob says  quote i would say there will always be  top indie games that will manage to make  a lot of money relative to their small  budgets  you just made the error i described  i can see you there will always be books  that make a lot of money  there will always be another hit book  like harry potter let's say you want to  write detective fiction right crime  crime noir fiction true crime fiction  even whatever you want to say okay if  you only look at the 10 most successful  books this year right that doesn't give  you a sense of what your position in the  world is as a creative artist as a  writer as a researcher etc doesn't give  you a sense of the attitude of the  investors or of the of the industry  right guess what yeah okay there was  there was one book last year that made a  lot of money  a detective story  there was one indie game that was  profitable you really have to get beyond  this this way of thing you have to think  about the the the millions of authors  who fail every year right with video  games it's not millions of creative  teams but you have to look at the many  many thousands of creative teams you  have to look at the mediocre examples  and i'm sorry it is not a profitable  industry the whole the industry as a  whole you can look at one example that  turned a profit i'm telling you even  when you look at award-winning and  successful indie games that industry is  existing on a break-even basis i just  mentioned that the the people are going  to talk about it honestly  they're normally programmers who are  making their money elsewhere there's a  pro let's say hypothetical example but  this is pretty close to fact you'll get  a programmer who says that look he makes  his money uh doing security work for the  banking industry so programming and  dealing with hacking and malfeasance and  this kind of thing so the banking  industry pays him a huge amount of money  to do computer security work this is  again programming related to the bank's  needs um okay so he does that for so  many hours a month or something he makes  a lot of money and then he'll say to you  openly that he does these independent  video games because he loves them  because he grew up with video games it's  his passion or whatever he puts a  certain amount of time and money to that  but  they never make any money or never make  any money to speak of compared to the  other ways he can earn money as a highly  skilled coder so video games are unusual  that way and that the people who have  the skills  can make a lot of money out of those  skills but doing a different kind of  computer programming right so  on and on it goes um but yeah no that  that it really i'm i'm just telling you  you can do more reading you're going to  disagree with me but my impression  really is that no that is making the  transition to be something much more  like  a live theater today uh where it's it's  it's a these are passion projects for  people but they have a very very low  likelihood of earning a significant  amount of money and even the ones that  do earn a significant amount of money  think about how much they're paying the  programmer how much they're paying the  coder they can't pay as much as  i knew a guy was a computer programmer  for the mining industry for gold mining  for analyzing satellite data for the  mining industry that pays real money  what's you're paid a lot of money to do  that work as a computer programmer right  and you can never make that out of uh  independent game that's downloaded from  steam for 80 percent off it only costs  you five dollars and guess what it's a  60 40 split 40 of the money goes to the  app store that you bought it from goes  to the middle man the programmers are  getting nothing the skilled people who  are doing all the labor are getting paid  very very little and they again they  themselves will say they're doing this  as a passion project because they love  it etc and the people who are most  honest about it normally the ones who  have some other way to make money with  writers they don't how how am i going to  make money how can i support myself as a  writer  this is it's a new tragedy in the 21st  century you might think that's an old  story but it's not there used to be a  lot of money in book publishing it  really used to used to be possible to  earn a living as a newspaper writer as a  magazine writer and work on your book in  your spare time then when your book came  out you actually made a lot of money and  then you got an advance from the  publisher for your next book that is all  gone  and  you know we have to think about um  how are we going to change the world now  that the internet has changed publishing  now that the internet has changed the  role of the author and the researcher  forever now that the author has  supported me  now that the internet has changed  cultural production how are we going to  innovate how are we going to produce a  new and different culture for the future  we all have new ideas we don't have our  new methods  of monetizing them are new methods of  making them pay someone's rent so that  they can get out and do the innovation  do the creative work etc  okay cutlew asks and this is going to  wrap up the live stream guys if anyone  has anything else intelligent to say let  me know um  cutler says quote i don't like your  comparison between pac-man and  shakespeare will pac-man be passed down  between the generations as shakespeare's  plays to have been  yes  it's already happened and it still is  happening we now have several  generations of  of pac-man and the question is sorry he  reiterates or says further quote how  many small children are growing up with  pac-man today and he says pac-man and  his legacy will die with the people who  grow up with it you're wrong  i'm sorry mario has gone from one  generation to the next the original  mario brothers very few people played at  the very first mario brothers game  that's before super mario by the way  very few people do that guess what you  had another generation that grew up  playing mario party another generation  that grew up playing mario 64. another  generation grows up playing mario  odyssey  no mario's significance goes on and on  forever and if anything it's only grown  it's become it's become bigger and i can  say the same about pac-man and  so my point is this pattern is actually  much more powerful with a cultural  phenomenon like that like super mario  brothers or pac-man than it is with  shakespeare if i ask the question how  many kids grow up with william  shakespeare it's completely surreal  people aren't shaped by shakespeare that  way but let me put you this way because  you're we're talking about kids in  particular all right  what if you want to make a new program  for children  that's different from sesame street  that's better than sesame street  i feel this way you know i don't want  kids to go on watching the same [ __ ]  cartoon about rudolph the red-nosed  reindeer the extent to which children's  entertainment is uh this earl boros this  self-devouring serpent of the same crap  getting exploited again again i don't  want the next generation to watch harry  potter i don't want the next generation  to watch x-men and batman like you know  if batman were meaningful in the 1930s  like is it still meaningful today well  you know  i'm just sick of it and it is sickening  to me and i it's partly a moral and  political thing i'm really disgusted by  the morality of batman i don't want to  raise my daughter or in future if i  hypothetically have a son i don't want  my daughter or son to grow up thinking  that you you solve problems with your  fists that you make the world a better  place by running down alleyways and  punching people and all that stuff  affected me growing up you know so you  look at the reality of children's  entertainment children's fiction because  i mean shakespeare is not right you say  okay what are the prospects can i get  some investors together to support me  will i do something really new and  different that's going to compete with  and try to replace  sesame street well the part of the  problem is that the success of sesame  street is so tremendous the accumulated  library of sesame street is so enormous  and it's available for free i mean you  can watch old sesame street episodes on  youtube right now you can either watch  this for nothing or again it's like five  dollars get it on dvd get the past uh  seasoned sesame street and sesame street  they do recycle their own content i've  seen this where they took all the  different segments of uh elmo and they  put that together they make a new show  just the elmo segments they they take  some of this old stuff and say well  guess what the the the potential the  possibility the opportunity for me right  to to create something really new and  different and better in children's  entertainment  it's not the case that sesame street  paved the way for the next generation  tragically paradoxically sesame street  is snuffing out the possibility of  something better replacing it and i feel  the same way about you know the iconic  success of batman superman the x-men  spider-man there is something better  there's a better moral to the story you  can treat you can teach your children  than these shitty fables about  spider-man these shitty fables about  superman that were never that meaningful  to begin with and have become  meaningless in banal now  but if you can't even pay your rent  we're not talking about a profit motive  it's not the dream that you're gonna  become a multi-millionaire if you can't  pay the rent if the investors can't make  back their initial capital outlay if  nobody can support this kind of  innovation this kind of experimentation  right what happens we start to have a  culture in a sickening kind of station  of stasis instead of innovation get a  kind of perpetual curatorship